Page  1 of 2
INITIATIVE PETITION  FOR  A  LAW
An  Initiative Petition to Protect Tenants by Limiting Rent Increases
Be  it enacted by the People, and  by their authority:
The General Laws  are hereby amended  by striking out chapter 40P  and  inserting in place thereof the following 
chapter
CHAPTER 40P. LIMITING RENT INCREASES
Section I. Purpose,
The purpose of this act is to provide housing stability for tenants, landlords, and communities across the 
commonwealth, and curb displacement as a result of the housing shortage and affordability crisis in 
Massachusetts.
Section 2. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter-
covered Dwelling Units” shall mean all dwelling units leased for residential, but not commercial, use, except:
(a) Dwelling units in owner-occupied buildings with four or fewer units.
(b) Dwelling units whose rents are subject to regulation by a public authority; provided, however, that 
occupancy by a tenant with a mobile housing voucher does not constitute being regulated by a public 
authority.
(c) Dwelling units that are rented primarily to transient guests for a period of less than 14 consecutive days.
(d) Dwelling units in facilities operated solely for educational, religious, or non-profit purposes.
(e) Dwelling units for which the first residential certificate of occupancy is less than 10  years old, for a 
period of 10  years from the date at which such certificate of occupancy was issued.
Section 3. Rent increase limits.
This chapter shall establish a limit on any annual rent increase for a covered dwelling unit in the 
commonwealth, which shall not exceed the annual increase in Consumer Price Index or 5%, whichever is lower, 
in any 12-month period. This limit shall apply whether or not there is a change in-tenancy during the relevant 
12-month period.


Page  2 of 2
For purposes of this chapter, the rent amount in place on January 31, 2026, shall serve as the base rent upon 
which any annual rent increase shall be applied. If a covered dwelling unit is vacant on the date of adoption, the 
last rent amount charged shall serve as the base rent. If there was no previous rent amount, or if no rent has been 
charged for at least the previous five years, for a covered dwelling unit the rent amount the owner first charges 
following the date of adoption shall serve as the base rent.
Where dwelling units are exempt, a notice of exemption must be provided with the lease for all tenancies. If 
there is no written lease for such dwelling units, the tenants-at-will must be provided with a written notice of 
exemption prior to the acceptance of the initial rent payment.
Section 4. Penalties.
Any violation of this chapter shall be deemed an unfair and deceptive act under chapter 93A of the General 
Laws. Any person claiming a violation of this chapter may pursue remedies under section 9 of chapter 93A. The 
attorney general is hereby authorized to bring an action under section 4 of chapter 93A to enforce this provision 
and to obtain restitution, civil penalties, injunctive relief, and any other relief awarded pursuant to said chapter 
93A.
Section 5. Interpretation of This Chapter,
Nothing in this section shall be construed to interfere with any existing rights or protections afforded to tenants 
under current state or federal law.

