APPROVED AS TO LEGAL FORM 
.
  
Business Administrator 
 
.
  
Corporation Counsel 
☐ Certification Required 
Ordinance of the City of Jersey City, N.J. 
File No. 
Agenda No. 
Agenda No. 
Ord. 25-105 
3.5 (1st Reading) 
4.4 (2nd Reading and Final Passage) 
 
 
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING AND SUPPLEMENTING CHAPTER 1 (GENERAL PROVISIONS) 
CHAPTER 218 (MULTIPLE DWELLINGS), CHAPTER 260 (RENT CONTROL), CHAPTER 254 
(PROPERTY MAINTENANCE) AND CHAPTER 1 OF THE CODE OF ORDINANCES OF THE CITY 
OF JERSEY CITY TO ESTABLISH MANDATORY MINIMUMS FOR VIOLATIONS OF HOUSING-
RELATED ORDINANCES. 
 
COUNCIL AS A WHOLE offered and moved adoption of the following ordinance:  
 
Whereas, the city code establishes numerous violations regarding multiple dwelling units; and, 
 
Whereas, the city holds that housing-related violations are specifically important to enforce as they have a direct 
impact on the health, safety, and welfare of residents; and 
 
Whereas, the Municipal Council seeks to ensure that violations issued in these matters have the proper 
disincentivizing effect; and 
 
Whereas, the Municipal council wishes to adopt mandatory minimum fines for housing-related violations in multi-
unit buildings; and, 
 
Whereas, the Municipal Council wishes to clarify that violations issued by city officials are continuing violations 
and to streamline the enforcement process; and, 
 
Therefore, let it be ordained by the municipal council as follows:  
 
A.Chapter 1 is hereby amended as follows: 
 
§ 1-25. General penalty.  
A.Notwithstanding any other section of this Code or any other ordinance, the maximum penalty for violating any 
provision of this Code shall be, in the discretion of the Court, all penalties for violating any provisions of this Code 
are subject to the maximums authorized by law (including N.J.S.A. 40:49-5) of a fine of up to two thousand dollars 
($2,000.00) and/or imprisonment for a period of up to ninety (90) days and/or a period of community service not 
exceeding ninety (90) days; provided, however, that for the violation of an ordinance pertaining to solid waste 
disposal the maximum penalty shall be ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), and the minimum penalty shall be two 
thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00); provided further, however, that for violations of Chapter 287 by owners 
of multiple-family residential property, the minimum penalty shall be: 
1.Two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for properties that are one (1) to four (4) units; and 
2.Five hundred dollars ($500.00) for properties that are five (5) or more units. 
B.Each day a violation of any provision of this Code or any ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate 
offense. This section shall not affect any mandatory minimum penalty established by any section of the Code or 
ordinance. 
 
 
B.Continuing violations. 
1.Continuing offense:  A period that begins with a first violation and continues until compliance is established. Each 
day that a violation of this Code or any ordinance continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
 
Page 1 of 5

Ord. 25-105 
 
An Ordinance amending and supplementing Chapter 1 (General Provisions) Chapter 218 (Multiple 
Dwellings), Chapter 260 (Rent Control), Chapter 254 (Property Maintenance) and Chapter 1 of the Code 
of Ordinances of the City of Jersey City to establish mandatory minimums for violations of housing-
related ordinances. 
 
2.Single summons sufficient: The City may charge a continuing offense in a single summons, and upon conviction 
by plea or trial, the court may impose a separate penalty for each day the violation continued without the need to 
issue a separate summons for each day. For purposes of calculating daily penalties, the period of violation shall run 
from the date of offense alleged on the summons and shall continue until the violation is abated or until conviction 
by plea or trial, whichever is first. 
3.Stacking: Penalties shall be assessed per violation, per day. 
4.Mandatory minimums: Nothing in this section alters any mandatory minimum penalty established elsewhere in this 
Code or ordinance. 
 
C.In addition to the penalties hereinabove provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of 
the provisions of this Code or any ordinance shall be deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by the city 
as provided by law, and each day that such condition continues shall be regarded as a new and separate offense. 
 
D.Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:69A-29, any person who is convicted of violating an ordinance by a plea or trial within 
one (1) year of the date of conviction by plea or trial of a previous violation of the same ordinance and who was 
fined for the previous violation, shall be sentenced by a court to an additional fine as a repeat offender. The 
additional fine imposed by the court upon a person for a repeated offense shall not be less than the minimum or 
exceed the maximum fine fixed for a violation of the ordinance, but shall be calculated separately from the fine 
imposed for the violation of the ordinance.   
 
 
B.Chapter 218 is hereby amended as follows: 
 
ARTICLE I - Security Service and Security Cameras 
 
§ 218-2.1. - Violations and penalties. 
 
An owner or managing agent who fails to comply with the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction, be 
punishable as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-25, except that there shall be a mandatory minimum 
fine of $100 per unit per day of the continuing offense.  
  
ARTICLE II - Registration of Vacant Dwelling Units 
 
§ 218-6. - Violations and penalties.  
Violation of any part of this article by an owner shall, upon conviction, be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, 
General Provisions, § 1-25. 
 
A violation of Article II shall, upon conviction, be punishable by a fine of up to $2000 per unit, as provided in 
Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-25, but not less than $100 per unit per day of the continuing offense 
 
ARTICLE III - Harassment and Eviction  
 
§ 218-11. - Violations and penalties. 
 
A.A violation of this article shall be punishable by a fine or imprisonment as set forth in Chapter 1, General 
Provisions, § 1-25, but there shall be a mandatory minimum of $100, per lawful occupant per day of the continuing 
offense. 
 
B.Each violation of this article shall constitute a separate violation independent of any other section or any order 
issued pursuant to this chapter. Each day's failure to comply with this article or subsection shall constitute a separate 
violation. 
 
ARTICLE IV - Withholding Units from Rental Market 
§ 218-15. - Violations and penalties. (NO CHANGES) 
 
ARTICLE V - Seating for Senior Citizens 
§ 218-19 - Violations and penalties. 
Page 2 of 5

Ord. 25-105 
 
An Ordinance amending and supplementing Chapter 1 (General Provisions) Chapter 218 (Multiple 
Dwellings), Chapter 260 (Rent Control), Chapter 254 (Property Maintenance) and Chapter 1 of the Code 
of Ordinances of the City of Jersey City to establish mandatory minimums for violations of housing-
related ordinances. 
 
A violation of this article shall be punishable by a fine or imprisonment as set forth in Chapter 1, General Provisions, 
§ 1-25, If the violation remains unabated thirty (30) days after the issuance of a Notice of Violation, there shall be a 
mandatory minimum fine of $100 per property per day of the continuing offense. 
  
C. Chapter 260 (RENT CONTROL) shall be amended as follows:  
§ 260-17. - Violations and penalties. 
A violation of any provisions of this chapter, including but not limited to the filing with the Rent Leveling Board or 
the Administrator of any material misstatement of fact, shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, General 
Provisions, § 1-25. A violation affecting more than one tenant shall be considered a separate violation as to each 
tenant per day of the continuing offense. Violations of multiple provisions of this Code shall be considered a 
separate violation as to each provision.  
  
a.For each violation of this chapter, the violator shall be subject to a mandatory fine of not less than one hundred 
dollars ($100.00) and not more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). 
 
C. Chapter 254 (PROPERTY MAINTENANCE) shall be amended as follows: 
§ 254-112. - Violations and penalties. 
Anyone found guilty of violating any section of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punishable as provided in 
Chapter 1, General Provisions, §1-25, with a minimum fine of $100 and a maximum fine of $2,000. A violation 
affecting more than one dwelling unit shall be considered a separate violation as to each unit per day of the 
continuing offense.  Additionally, anyone found guilty of violating §254-27 (heating facilities and duty to supply 
heat), shall be punished by a minimum fine of at least $100. 
 
 
 
Page 3 of 5

Ord. 25-105 
 
An Ordinance amending and supplementing Chapter 1 (General Provisions) Chapter 218 (Multiple 
Dwellings), Chapter 260 (Rent Control), Chapter 254 (Property Maintenance) and Chapter 1 of the Code 
of Ordinances of the City of Jersey City to establish mandatory minimums for violations of housing-
related ordinances. 
 
 
RECORD OF COUNCIL VOTE ON INTRODUCTION – Sep 24 2025 
 RIDLEY  AYE  SALEH  AYE  DEGISE  AYE  
 HULINGS  AYE  SOLOMON  AYE  RIVERA  AYE 9-0 
 BOGGIANO  AYE  GILMORE  AYE  WATTERMAN, 
PRES 
 AYE  
 
RECORD OF COUNCIL VOTE TO CLOSE PUBLIC HEARING  – Oct 8 2025 
 RIDLEY  AYE  SALEH  ABSENT  DEGISE  AYE  
 HULINGS  AYE  SOLOMON  AYE  RIVERA  AYE 7-2 
 BOGGIANO  AYE  GRIFFIN  ABSENT  WATTERMAN, 
PRES. 
 AYE  
 
SPEAKERS: 
Kevin Weller 
Mark Boyles 
Daniel Feldman 
Michele Hirsch 
 
RECORD OF COUNCIL VOTE ON AMENDMENTS, IF ANY –  
 RIDLEY   SALEH   DEGISE   
 HULINGS   SOLOMON   RIVERA   
 BOGGIANO   GRIFFIN   WATTERMAN, 
PRES.   
 
RECORD OF FINAL COUNCIL VOTE – Oct 8 2025 
 RIDLEY  AYE  SALEH  AYE  DEGISE  AYE  
 ZUPPA, JR.  AYE  SOLOMON  AYE  RIVERA  AYE 9-0 
 BOGGIANO  AYE  GRIFFIN  AYE  WATTERMAN, 
PRES. 
 AYE  
 
Adopted on first reading of the Council of Jersey City, N.J. on Sep 24 2025 
Adopted on second and final reading after hearing on Oct 8 2025 
 
This is to certify that the foregoing Ordinance was adopted 
by the Municipal Council at its meeting on Oct 8 2025 
 
 
  
.
  
City Clerk 
 
.
  
Joyce E. Watterman, President of Council 
Approved: Oct 8 2025 
 
   
  
 
Steven M. Fulop, Mayor 
Date to Mayor: Oct 9 2025 
Approved: Oct 9 2025 
 
Page 4 of 5

Ord. 25-105 
 
An Ordinance amending and supplementing Chapter 1 (General Provisions) Chapter 218 (Multiple 
Dwellings), Chapter 260 (Rent Control), Chapter 254 (Property Maintenance) and Chapter 1 of the Code 
of Ordinances of the City of Jersey City to establish mandatory minimums for violations of housing-
related ordinances. 
 
FACT SHEET - 
This summary sheet is to be attached to the front of any ordinance that is submitted for Council consideration. 
Incomplete or vague fact sheets will be returned with the ordinance. 
 
Project Manager 
James Solomon, Councilperson 201-547-5315 ismith@jcnj.org  
Department  Municipal Council 
Division  Municipal Council 
 
Note: Project Manager must be available by phone during agenda meeting (Wednesday prior to council meeting @ 
1:00 p.m.)  
 
Meeting Regular Meeting of Municipal Council - Sep 24 2025 
 
Purpose 
Ordinance establishing Mandatory minimums 
 
Cost (Identify all sources and amounts)  Contract term (include all)  
N/A   
 
Approved by Status: 
John McKinney, Attorney Approved - Sep 17 2025 
 
Page 5 of 5
