1 of 7 
HOUSE  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  No. 5008 
 
 
The Commonwealth of Massachusetts 
—————— 
 
INITIATIVE PETITION OF ADAM GOMEZ AND OTHERS. 
 
 
         
     OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY. 
 
     BOSTON, January 7, 2026. 
 
Timothy Carroll 
Clerk of the House of Representatives 
State House 
Boston, Massachusetts 02133 
 
Sir: — I herewith transmit to you, in accordance with the requirements 
of Article XLVIII of the Amendments to the Constitution “An Initiative Petition 
to Protect Tenants by Limiting Rent Increases,” signed by ten qualified voters and 
filed with this department on or before December 3, 2025, together with additional 
signatures of qualified voters in the number of 88,132, being a sufficient number 
to comply with the provisions of said Article.     
                                   
 
     Sincerely, 
 
WILLIAM FRANCIS GALVIN 
Secretary of the Commonwealth. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
AN INITIATIVE PETITION. 
 
    Pursuant to Article XLVIII of the Amendments to the Constitution of the 
Commonwealth, as amended, the undersigned qualified voters of the 
Commonwealth, ten in number at least, hereby petition for the enactment into law 
of the following measure: 
  

2 of 7 
        FILED ON: 1/21/2026 
HOUSE  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  No. 5008 
 
 
The Commonwealth of Massachusetts 
 
_______________ 
In the One Hundred and Ninety-Fourth General Court 
(2025-2026) 
_______________ 
 
An Act to protect tenants by limiting rent increases. 
 
 Be it enacted by the People, and by their authority, as follows: 
 
1  The General Laws are hereby amended by striking out chapter 40P and inserting in place 
2 thereof the following chapter:- 
3 CHAPTER 40P. LIMITING RENT INCREASES 
4 Section 1. Purpose.  
5 The purpose of this act is to provide housing stability for tenants, landlords, and communities 
6 across the commonwealth, and curb displacement as a result of the housing shortage and 
7 affordability crisis in Massachusetts.  
8 Section 2. Definitions.  
9 For the purposes of this chapter: — 
10 “Covered Dwelling Units” shall mean all dwelling units leased for residential, but not 
11 commercial, use, except:  

3 of 7 
12 (a) Dwelling units in owner-occupied buildings with four or fewer units.  
13 (b) Dwelling units whose rents are subject to regulation by a public authority; provided, 
14 however, that occupancy by a tenant with a mobile housing voucher does not constitute being 
15 regulated by a public authority.  
16 (c) Dwelling units that are rented primarily to transient guests for a period of less than 14 
17 consecutive days.  
18 (d) Dwelling units in facilities operated solely for educational, religious, or non-profit purposes.  
19 (e) Dwelling units for which the first residential certificate of occupancy is less than 10 years 
20 old, for a period of 10 years from the date at which such certificate of occupancy was issued.  
21 Section 3. Rent increase limits.  
22 This chapter shall establish a limit on any annual rent increase for a covered dwelling unit in the 
23 commonwealth, which shall not exceed the annual increase in Consumer Price Index or 5%, 
24 whichever is lower, in any 12-month period. This limit shall apply whether or not there is a 
25 change in-tenancy during the relevant 12-month period. 
26 For purposes of this chapter, the rent amount in place on January 31, 2026, shall serve as the 
27 base rent upon which any annual rent increase shall be applied. If a covered dwelling unit is 
28 vacant on the date of adoption, the last rent amount charged shall serve as the base rent. If there 
29 was no previous rent amount, or if no rent has been charged for at least the previous five years, 
30 for a covered dwelling unit the rent amount the owner first charges following the date of 
31 adoption shall serve as the base rent.  

4 of 7 
32 Where dwelling units are exempt, a notice of exemption must be provided with the lease for all 
33 tenancies. If there is no written lease for such dwelling units, the tenants-at-will must be 
34 provided with a written notice of exemption prior to the acceptance of the initial rent payment.  
35 Section 4. Penalties.  
36 Any violation of this chapter shall be deemed an unfair and deceptive act under chapter 93A of 
37 the General Laws. Any person claiming a violation of this chapter may pursue remedies under 
38 section 9 of chapter 93A. The attorney general is hereby authorized to bring an action under 
39 section 4 of chapter 93A to enforce this provision and to obtain restitution, civil penalties, 
40 injunctive relief, and any other relief awarded pursuant to said chapter 93A.  
41 Section 5. Interpretation of This Chapter,  
42 Nothing in this section shall be construed to interfere with any existing rights or protections 
43 afforded to tenants under current state or federal law.
 
 

5 of 7 
FIRST TEN SIGNERS 
NAME RESIDENCE CITY OR TOWN 
Adam Gomez 447 Riverside Road Springfield 
Patricia D. Jehlen 67 Dane Street Somerville 
Samantha Victoria 
Montaño 
77 Boylston Street Boston 
Nicole McClain 99 Eutaw Avenue Lynn 
Rose K. Webster-
Smith 
87 Leatherleaf Drive Springfield 
Willie M. Hurd 60 Edson Street Boston 
Kathleen Talbot 87 Highland Avenue Westfield 
Etel Haxhiaj 4 Englewood Avenue Worcester 
Annie Gordon 50 Fairlawn Avenue, #D11 Boston 
Julia Mejia 48 Capen Street Boston 
  

6 of 7 
 
CERTIFICATE OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL. 
 
 
            September 3, 2025. 
 
 
 
Honorable William Francis Galvin 
Secretary of the Commonwealth 
One Ashburton Place, Room 1705 
Boston, Massachusetts 02108 
 
 
Re: Initiative Petition No. 25-21:  An Initiative Petition to Protect Tenants 
by Limiting Rent Increases 
 
Dear Secretary Galvin: 
 
In accordance with the provisions of Article 48 of the Amendments to 
the Massachusetts Constitution, I have reviewed the above-referenced initiative 
petition, which was submitted to me on or before the first Wednesday of August 
of this year. 
 
I hereby certify that this measure is in proper form for submission to 
the people; that the measure is not, either affirmatively or negatively, 
substantially the same as any measure which has been qualified for submission 
or submitted to the people at either of the two preceding biennial state elections; 
and that it contains only subjects that are related or are mutually dependent and 
which are not excluded from the initiative process pursuant to Article 48, the 
Initiative, Part 2, Section 2. 
 
In accordance with Article 48, I enclose a fair, concise summary of the 
measure. 
 
 
Sincerely, 
 
ANDREA JOY CAMPBELL, 
Attorney General. 

7 of 7 
SUMMARY OF 25-21 
This proposed law would limit the annual rent increase for residential units in 
Massachusetts to the annual increase in the Consumer Price Index for a 12-month period, or 5%, 
whichever is lower. The law would not apply to units in owner-occupied buildings with four or 
fewer units; units that are subject to regulation by a public authority; units rented to transient 
guests for periods of less than 14 days; units operated for educational, religious, or non-profit 
purposes; and units that received their residential certificate of occupancy within the last 10 
years. The rent in place for a unit as of January 31, 2026, would serve as the base rent for the 
annual rent increase limit. A violation of this law would be a violation of the state consumer 
protection law. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                             
 
 
 
 
 
 
